My grandfather, God bless him,
but my grandfather used to always tell me,
"Chris, buy land, they're not making anymore."
I agree.
And just like we discussed with commodities
there's a scarcity value when it comes to real estate.
And my father used to always tell me
that the three most important things to consider
when investing in real estate are as follows:
location, location, location.
Aside from location, location, location,
when interest rates are low
real estate prices tend to go up.
And there're exceptions of course.
But when interest rates are low,
then so too is the cost to get a loan
to buy a house, meaning a mortgage.
And we're gonna cover how to calculate
mortgage loan payments in the next exercise
and what to watch out for when considering a mortgage.
So how much do we spend on a house?
Well, please don't buy a house
where the loan, meaning the mortgage,
is more than twice your household income.
And some people might think that I'm being
too conservative, but there're many other expenses
that we need to consider when buying a house,
or an apartment, including property tax,
maintenance fees, homeowner's insurance,
transportation expenses if you live farther away.
And this is why I think two times
your total household income is the most
you should spend ever on a mortgage.
And if you and your significant other, for example,
make $100,000 combined per year in income,
then make sure that the loan, meaning the mortgage,
that you're gonna get is not more than $200,000.
And the equation is as follows.
Two times your household income
equals the mortgage loan maximum recommended size.
However, please note.
This does not mean that you should not buy a house
that costs more that $200,000.
This just means that the maximum loan size,
meaning your mortgage,
shouldn't be greater than $200,000.
So, if you save 50K, $50,000,
then you can buy a house that costs $250,000
as your mortgage maximum size will be $200,000
and you pay down the 50K
as part of your down payment, okay?
Now, as a quick side note.
Lenders prefer to see you spend less than 30%
of your annual net income on your house,
or your apartment, including all expenses
like property tax, et cetera.
And for those of you in your twenties
watching this please, please, please, please, please
save, save, save, save as much as you can
so you can put down a big down payment
for your first home purchase
so that your mortgage isn't too high
relative to your salary.
Buying your own house, or your own apartment,
when you can afford it is potentially
the best investment you'll ever make.
Why?
Because think of all the money
you will save by not renting.
Go back to exercise number one if you want,
the time value of money exercises, and just answer
how much money you spend on rent
to figure out how much money you'd be saving
if you bought a house in the long run.
Now, let me move on and talk about,
and I want to speak specifically
to those in your twenties watching this,
please save, save, save as much money as you can
so you can put a down payment on a house,
or an apartment, by the time you're in your thirties
or forties, wherever it might be.
Buying your house when you can afford it
is the best investment you might ever make.
Just think about the money you're gonna save
by not renting.
And my wife Christine and I, we had a lot of debt
when we graduated from university
and we could not buy in our twenties
so we did it later in life.
And most people can't do it in their twenties.
We actually bought our first place after our twenties.
We lived in New York City at that time,
and I remember how I spoke about, earlier
in the course, about Warren Buffett saying,
"Be greedy when others are fearful,
"and be fearful when others are greedy."
This means, of course, buy when nobody else
wants to and vice versa.
Well, Christine and I lived in New York City
last decade and we really wanted to buy
as we wasted so much money on renting.
It was just ridiculous.
We lived in New York City and we witnessed 9/11.
It was awful.
I worked on the 49th floor
of the most southern building in Manhattan,
which is Goldman Sachs, and God bless
all those had passed away, it was awful.
It was awful.
And I remember a couple of months after 9/11
Christine and I started to look to buy a place
and I remember it felt so uncomfortable to buy then.
There was so much uncertainty,
and markets hate uncertainty as you know.
Stock market hates uncertainty
and so does the real estate market.
I remember we almost didn't even think
about buying because it felt so uncomfortable.
And then, Christine and I realized that wait a second,
this feels really uncomfortable,
this means everybody feels uncomfortable buying.
I remember my friends at the time
were saying I was crazy even considering,
and then it hit me that it feels so uncomfortable,
then this means that this is the right time to buy
because nobody else is buying
and prices are more reasonable,
when everybody is uncomfortable.
So it turned out to be a great investment for us.
And so we ended up buying a place
in New York, it worked out okay.
So, and then we left New York
partially because we had our first kid,
it was too expensive living in the city
with a kid, whatever.
Okay, long story.
My job in this section, though, of the course
is to make sure that you don't take on too much debt.
And I also want to help you understand
what to consider and watch out for
when you're buying your first house
or your first apartment.
And I'll also cover investing in what are called
investment properties in this section,
meaning investments in property
that is not your primary residence.
Separately, remember all that stuff
we spoke about with your credit score
earlier in the course?
We spoke about the importance of having
a great credit score so you can buy
your own house or your own apartment.
So, what if your credit score is not good enough,
or what if you didn't have enough money to buy your home.
Well, in many countries, there're tax benefits
to your family actually helping you buy your home.
You can get your family to help you out.
And the annual tax benefit is the tax-free gift.
It can be an excess of $10,000 in the United States.
For example.
In the United States, one parent, as of right now,
can give their child $14,000 per year as a tax-free gift.
This means that two parents in the same year
can give that same child 28 grand.
And let's assume that two parents have a son
and they give their son 28K, or 14K each.
They can also give their daughter-in-law,
for example, that is married to their son
an additional 28K tax free for a total of 56K.
Okay, and this makes the process
of buying a house much easier of course,
if you have that option and if you can swallow
your pride and ask.
I didn't get help but there's a point,
I kind of wish I did, I kind of wish I bought earlier
and just kind of swallowed my pride and asked.
But anyway, it is what it is, doesn't matter.
There's no gift tax in Canada actually where I grew up.
But to see if there's a gift tax in your country,
just search for gift tax, country name obviously.
Okay.
Here are 11 things, 11 other things to consider
before buying a house or an apartment.
Number one.
Can you rent out part of your house
or a room in that house or apartment using Airbnb.
We used to rent out a room using Airbnb
to help us pay for the mortgage.
We had a small room that we never used,
and then what I did was I actually built a door
so that our house was more secure,
and then we rented out that room.
And we won't do it anymore but,
anyway it looks like this here.
But we also, and I mentioned this earlier
in the course, I won't spend much time on this.
Go to August.com and buy a secure lock like this one.
And you can send the digital key of this
to the people renting so they can use their iPhone
or Android device to get the key which expires.
Again, see August.com for more details on this.
I just installed this generation three
and it works out great.
Number two.
Hire a lawyer before you sign anything,
especially since a real estate lawyer
will have your back and have your best interest
in mind, when it comes to inspection fees,
the appraisal, et cetera.
Number three, and I hate to say this.
But it makes sense to have a real estate broker
help you despite their crazy 5% fee
when you're buying or selling
unless you're incredibly sophisticated
when it comes to real estate which I'm not.
There's an insane amount of paper work
that needs to be completed by these brokers,
and these real estate brokers can actually,
they can help you a lot with this stuff.
It's worth it.
And if you can, get pre-approval for a mortgage amount
and tell the buyer this, if you give them an offer,
because a lot of your competitors won't do this
when trying to buy the house or apartment
you want, and you might be able to get
a better price because of this.
Number five.
Make sure you live in a good school district
as it can really help your property value over time.
Six.
Try your best to get a fixed mortgage
and not one that floats, which can be catastrophic.
We will discuss what this means
in a lot more detail in the next lesson.
The ones that float are often called ARMs,
which stands for adjustable rate mortgage.
And if you do an ARM, make sure you can pay
the adjustable, floating, or variable, rate
in the absolute worst case scenario.
If rates were to go from 5% to 8%,
most of these loans can't adjust
more than 300 basis points or 3%,
would you be okay still?
We'll do an exercise in the next section,
look at that.
Okay, so just be conservative please,
when it comes to buying your home,
or you might have unnecessary sleepless nights,
which can hurt your health,
and I don't want that to happen to you.
And we're gonna cover mathematical examples
of all this mortgage stuff
and interest rates stuff in the next exercise.
Yeah.
If you get a mortgage and interest rates drop,
you need to immediately call your mortgage broker
and ask if you refinance at a lower rate.
And again, we'll cover this in detail
in the next exercise.
When interest rates dropped a lot,
I couldn't get my mortgage broker live
because everybody was refinancing.
He wouldn't return my calls he was so busy.
So I ditched work one day
and I went to his office door and I waited
till he came in that morning.
And he was like, "Hey, how are you?"
And I got it done anyway.
Side note, sorry.
Number seven.
Try to pay down at least 25% for your down payment.
If your credit rating is high meaning it's good,
meaning above 700 in the United States,
you don't even need to make a big down payment.
But I want you to be conservative,
so I strongly advise against making a small down payment.
Just try to put down much much more
than 25% for your down payment if you can.
Number eight.
Be organized please, as there will be
a lot of paper work involved.
Remember earlier in the course
where we discussed our accordion folder
tax documents organization system.
Just keep all of the documents
you get for buying the house or apartment
in the year when you buy that house or apartment.
Just keep all of your paycheck receipts
or paper work and bank statements
and the job offer letter you got when you got the job
and documentation for everything,
and just throw them all
into those annual accordion folders
we spoke about because I promise you,
you will need a lot of that stuff later in life
when you buy a house, or buy another house,
or move, et cetera, that sort of thing.
It's so hard hunting down all the addresses
when you rent so long like I did.
Okay, number nine.
Please, please, please, please
do whatever it takes to not renovate your house.
Because contractors will rob you blind
as they often, and I'm not exaggerating here,
but contractors often charge you 100% more
than what you thought you would pay.
Number 10.
Don't buy the nicest or most expensive house
in the neighborhood.
Because when you sell it buyers will compare
the price with the price of other houses
in the area that recently sold for less.
And lastly, number 11.
Don't buy in a remote area that is too far away
from public transportation,
unless it's a cottage or a country home, et cetera.